this is one of the things that I find
puzzling for example about Dawkins
because
Dawkins formulated the idea of meme
which is by the way the same idea as
archetype it's exactly the same idea
except he just stopped it's like okay
there are memes they're selected for
okay selected on what basis exactly does
that mean there's a hierarchy of memes
are the memes more likely that are the
memes that are conserved more likely to
be what would you say viable organisms
and if they're viable organisms are they
microcosms this is really interesting in
in terms of the survivability because
there's a point I I've spoken to Richard
Dawkins well a number of times but twice
on my podcast and the second time
somebody pointed out to me that there
might be a point of agreement between
you two that that has been overlooked
which is that I don't know if you've
ever come across the The evolutionary
argument against naturalism or the
argument from reason the idea that if
you're a materialist you can't trust
your your reasonable faculties so Alvin
planting have formulated this very well
very geniusly I think in saying that if
you believe that evolution by natural
selection happens materially what does
natural selection select for
survivability so if you're a materialist
that means that the very rational
faculty that you're using right now
evolves not to be sensitive to truth but
to survivability yes that's right and if
that's the case well definitely why do
you believe in the truth of evolution
well because you've been rationally
convinced of it but the thing that
you've just ascented to the belief
itself has just undercut the process by
which you that Bel there's a whole the
the the New England pragmatists figured
this out in like 1880 now I think this
is a fascinating I think it really is
just a it's exciting it's it's no that's
for sure that's for sure it's actually a
point where Darwin and Newton do not
come together how do you mean well the
darwinian definition of true and the
Newtonian definition not so here's the
thing here's the thing you had a
conversation with Sam Harris you've had
you've had a number but one of them I
don't think it was a live event I think
it was before that you're talking about
truth yeah and awkward first second talk
I had with him I was extremely ill you
know it was awkward to listen to because
it felt very much like and I remember at
the time thinking you know what is this
this Jordan Peterson talking about like
truth is like darwinian truth is about
like survivability what do you mean
truth is true true the way an arrow
flies yeah right and now I asked Richard
Dawkins about the evolutionary argument
against naturalism I said well well how
can you know that what you believe is
true and he said because believing true
things makes me more likely to survive
hey hey boy watch where you go with that
I didn't catch it at the time but I
thought to myself afterwards it was one
of my commenters on on on patreon
actually had had mentioned this he was
listening to Rich and I said but you
know but okay maybe but sometimes it's
at least possible that something that's
false helps you to survive you know the
rustling in the bushes believing that
that's a lion every time or a tiger even
if it's not that helps you to survive
because that one time that it is you're
still going to run away and it costs you
nothing to run away when it's not a
tiger so believing it's a tiger even
when it's not it's going to help you
that's why we have a negativity bias
yeah and and and DW says well yeah of
course there are some circumstances
where believing something false could be
beneficial to survival and I said well
how do you know that 2 plus 2 equals 4
is not one of those and it seemed as
though he would he he was just saying
that believing that would not be
advantageous to our survival which might
well be true but if that's the case then
suddenly I'm listening to what you're
saying about uh truth being more sort of
darwinian related to survivability and I
think maybe you two would agree there
and I think well why is it that when you
sit down with Richard Dawkins you find
it difficult to have a conversation with
each other and and well I think it's
partly because we don't know each other
very well
that's and also there are things he
knows that I don't know and there are
things I know that he doesn't know now I
would say in my defense that I what
would you say I'm more of the aware
aware of the things he knows that I
don't know than he is of the things I
know that he doesn't know right so for
example as far as I can tell Dawkins
doesn't know anything about the yian
tradition of literary interpretation and
that actually if you're going to talk
about religion that's actually a fatal
flaw right so and you know he's called
me for example drunk on symbols it's
like well the imagination is a
biological
function and it has a structure and a
purpose and it has its own logos its own
intelligence
and if you're not aware that do drunk
symbols it just me you don't know what
you're talking so that that frustration
that that you uh appeal to there when
you when you hear Richard Dawkins um I
think Terry Eagleton said that listening
to Dawkins on theology is like listening
to somebody who write a book about
biology whose only knowledge of the
subject is having once read the Great
British book of birds and okay fair
enough that but that actually turns out
to be a real problem it's a problem with
regards even to the meme idea because
you don't have to extend daw's work very
far to understand that religious stories
are memes sure right yeah well and and
there's a hierarchy of memes and some of
them are very functional but then here's
the thing like that frustration that
you're sort of throwing in that
direction I think people throw it throw
towards you and when when you say well
religion you don't have to look very far
see that religion is a meme well without
further clarification and of course it's
going to be it you can understand why to
to somebody first listening that sounds
almost atheistic or religion is a meme
no religion is not religion is not a
true historical account of you know the
the history of the universe it's not a
true historical account it's a meme now
it's it it when you say that when you
say that the resurrection of Jesus well
what does it mean historically that the
spirit of God brooded upon the
primordial Waters like what does that
mean historically no one no one
knows think I don't think that at least
most of Genesis parts of Genesis are
supposed to be I mean the the Bible is a
is a is a library right it's not a book
and that means that it's going to
contain different genres that's for sure
and so when when and some of them are
more historically accurate and some of
them tilt more
towards that that kind of elusive I
don't mean elusive in the I mean Al l l
u i sure right that that Elusive and
symbolic form that characterizes Genesis
one so because there are different
genres here it depends on what story
we're talking about and I think what I
often observe you doing
is we might talk about uh
Christianity and if you aren't
comfortable committing to a historical
ideal you'll start talking about the the
spirit moving over the face of the
waters which is which is obviously a
much more mythological ideal um and not
not quite equivocating them but but
moving between them too quickly and and
not delineating them enough so if if I
asked you you know do you think that the
spirit moved across the face of the
waters and you said to me something like
I think it's still happening right that
is what I would say say hey fair enough
yeah that makes sense it always happens
it happened at the beginning of time and
it's always happening when somebody says
did The Exodus story happen did did the
did the Jews enslaved in Egypt Break
Free of their slavery and move to the
promised land across the desert for for
40 years did that happen MH you have
also said of The Exodus specifically
it's still happening yes now to me
that's far more inappropriate than
saying that the spirit is still moving
across the face of the waters because I
think what people mean there is do you
believe that these people in that time
period actually did this in such a way
that for instance might show up in an
archaeological report well I think that
I think that's the simplest answer to
that is
probably sure and that's that's fine too
but then but we don't know I mean there
like to the degree that there's been
archaeological investigations into the
kinds of biblical narratives that you've
described the archaeological evidence
tends to all on the side of historical
accuracy in relationship to the Bible
quite surprisingly of clearly your your
I mean you you spent more time in Exodus
than probably any person I've ever met
in person right clearly the story sort
of captivates you and you think it's
really important and and and can a lot
of course it's infinitely deep story I
think most people speaking to you
already know that you think that right
and so when they ask you a question when
when they said suddenly say to you but
do you think it really happened well
what the hell does that mean you you you
must know that what they mean is what I
was talking about a second ago which is
that sort of um what what okay so fine
so it's easy just to turn this around
it's like okay what exactly happened in
in your historical account when Moses
encountered the burning bush I don't
need to know exactly what happened what
I need to know is I'm not asking you
specifically or or attacking you for
that what I need to know is that if I
sort
of went to the Egyptian
desert at sort of the time that the
story is alleged to have take taken
place in history would I see a mass
movement of Israelites from Egypt into
the promised land would I see people
with feet walking through the desert
leaving foot well let's let's let's take
it apart rationally so and but you also
understand that when when someone's
asking that and you like even if you
don't like the question you must
understand what someone's asking yes
well I understand many of the things
that they're doing simultaneously you
must also understand that when you then
say it's still happening yeah people
just go what are you talking about yeah
well I would say that's not my
problem but it's it's it becomes a
problem when you understand that
someone's asking a quite benal
historical question yeah but you don't
get to do that but why not because the
stories that you're dealing with aren't
banel I agree but like uh one so you
can't reduce them to something even if
it's even if it's what would you call it
even if it's reassuring this actually
happened it's well then what do you do
with the burning bush it's actually
happened one comparison I would make is
is
um between this and talking about
Fiction more broadly yeah right well you
got it right earlier you know I would
say you KN you noted that the the the
stories in the in in the in the biblical
Library leap across genres yes right
well we know this because sometimes
they're poetry and sometimes song yeah
exactly and so so in any given story
there's going to be historical account
plus mythological overlay and you know
you have to be a discriminating reader
to kind of see what's different and you
don't just get to say well all the
mythological symbolism is historical
reality it's like no it's not but here's
the thing for example so like take take
a piece of trivial fiction like Forest
Gump yeah right we say like okay did
that happened now I I think that what
you probably say is something like well
I don't think the events literally
occurred but I think that they obviously
get at something that's sort of
perennially true about human nature then
suppose I said they happened to they
existed as a pattern but there's a scene
in Forest Gump when you know he I think
he meets the president is it JFK at the
time I think he goes and meets John F
Kennedy yeah and so I said to you well
well is is JFK the the like that part of
that specific part of that story is it
is it true that JFK was the President
right and you would probably just say
yeah yeah you you wouldn't say anything
more complicated and even though the
subject as a whole of like is Forest
Gump true is Hamlet true that's a
complicated question very but
specifically when I say ah but
interestingly there's this there's this
there's this little point I want to make
in this discussion do you think that
that JFK was actually the president you
would say yes why do you think it
matters to people like I don't know
these are ancient accounts maybe that's
the biggest problem maybe that's the
biggest problem that that you have with
people who are asking these question it
is why why what what point are you
trying to make here so the point is I
know what the point usually is is the
people who are asking the question
believe that true in uniring means
objectively happened in history like the
things that we're seeing right now now
happen it's like well no that's not how
that's that's not what those stories are
like for me some of it is but for a
Christian when asking you that it's
probably because for them they have an
understanding of Christianity that
requires believing in that kind of Truth
for me yeah I know that and the reason
why why I hope that like me asking these
questions will be less frustrating to
you is because I have no desire for that
I I don't care about that I'm genuinely
just interested in what you think and so
my my my desire to know whether you
think Exodus historically happened goes
no further than a point of interest
about your beliefs well so there's
there's elements of the especially the
setup to The Exodus story that strike me
as very very plausible historically so
for
example the the Jews before the Pharaoh
of that time were under the guidance and
protection of Joseph and the previous
pharaoh and they regarded the Israelites
as benefactors because they had Joseph
had helped save the kingdom and his
people were welcome but that was
forgotten and so the new pharaoh and the
new Egyptians regard the appallingly
successful Jews
as destructive Interlopers and they make
them slaves it's like well can you
believe that well it happens all the
time it's happening right now it's very
in this particular case saying it's very
plaus
like saying something like well yeah it
could have happened I don't
know well I I don't know I don't think
anybody knows so when some asks did The
Exodus really happen that that word
really when they say if I just really is
the is the if I said did The Exodus
happen and and I'd understand why you
would then say well you've got to
understand what kind of story this is
fine then if somebody says yeah but did
it really happen which parts of it even
if they're not expressing it very well
like what they're getting at there is
they're trying to emphasize the the
historicity they're trying to say yeah
but did it historically happen probably
is what they mean by the word really
there right but but the thing is it
speaks of their see they have a the
problem is is that Christians who ask
that have a metaphysics that's not
Christian MH
[Music]